#+TODO: TODO STARTED | DONE SKIPPED

Based on https://cdw.sourceforge.net/documentation/release_checklist/release_checklist.html


* TODO Review opened tickets

You may have some plans for current dev cycle, but take a look at opened
tickets. Maybe there is some high-priority ticket that needs to be included
in current dev cycle?

* TODO Define scope of changes to be done in this release

Describe them here, and stick to them during the development phase. Don't
extend the scope unless really necessary (e.g. unless you find a serious
bug).

If you plan to fix one of tickets from README.dev.org -> 'Bugs, feature
requests' list, put the ticket numbers on the list below.

The goals of this development cycle are:
1.

* TODO Add -Werror to CFLAGS
During development phase you don't want to introduce any issues that can be
caught by compiler. -Werror will make sure that you will fix them before they
slip into repo.

* TODO Review 'terminology'

Refresh your knowledge of terminology and conventions for code and
documentation by reading the related section in README.dev.org.

Do this in order to avoid introducing non-compliant changes in code or
documentation.

* TODO Review 'lessons learned'

The previous development cycle may have happened a long time ago, and you may
have forgotten the lessons learned during the previous development cycle.

Refresh the lessons now to avoid making the same mistakes that you made in
the past.

Try to read the lessons learned few times during current development cycle.

* TODO Do the actual coding

Do whatever you planned to do for given release (see first point in this
document).

* TODO Stop coding

Regardless of what you did: fixing bugs, refactoring, adding features,
reviewing code, you need to be able to say "This is where I need to stop".
Constant making changes in code won't help you "freeze" your code and make a
release.

* TODO Review changes - quality check

Review changes in code, documentation and other files to catch and fix
problems, and to do last-minute necessary minor improvements.

Review all changes done since previous release.

Update comments and other documentation.

Update @reviewedon tags in functions' top-level comments while doing the
review.

Don't be afraid to do refactoring if you notice opportunities or necessity to
do so.

Try to fix problems that you find during the review - especially those that
may affect end user.

Note down (as "tickets" in README.dev.org or as TODO/FIXME notes in code) any
problems that won't be fixed in this release.

* TODO Static code analysis

TODO: some functionalities in the package are disabled by default (mostly the
debug functionalities). You may want to enable them through ./configure
before running the static analysis.

These checks should be a part of Continuous Integration pipeline, but:
1. they are not (yet) (TODO: make them part of CI),
2. an additional 'manual' check of results should ensure that no serious
   issues have crept in.

** TODO clang-tidy

Use "run-clang-tidy" wrapper program (should be installed from some Linux
package). The wrapper will use .clang-tidy config file present in package's
root dir.

"bear" program should be installed from a Linux package.

1. Prepare the project's source code package for clang-tidy: configure it and
   build compilation database:

    ./configure --enable-dev-receiver-test --enable-dev-libcw-debugging --enable-dev-pcm-samples-file
    bear -- make && bear --append -- make check

2. Run clang-tidy:

    run-clang-tidy-11

3. Fix reported issues.

** TODO cppcheck

Use ./qa/lint_cppcheck.sh script to run cppcheck. The script passes some
options to cppcheck.

"bear" program should be installed from a Linux package.

1. Prepare the project's source code package for validation: configure it and
   build compilation database:

    ./configure --enable-dev-receiver-test --enable-dev-libcw-debugging --enable-dev-pcm-samples-file
    bear -- make && bear --append -- make check

2. Run cppcheck:

    ./qa/lint_cppcheck.sh

3. Fix reported issues.

* TODO Come up with new version numbers
Based on scope of changes that you did, come up with new version number of
unixcw package and of libcw.

For libcw library remember to obey the rules from
http://www.gnu.org/software/libtool/manual/html_node/Updating-version-info.html.

** TODO Update the unixcw package number throughout unixcw package
 - configure.ac/AC_INIT
 - NEWS + README files
 - unixcw-x.y.z.lsm (file name and contents)
 - ./qa/build_debian_packages.sh/VERSION
 - man pages of cw, cwgen, cwcp, xcwcp
 - help text in src/cwcp/cwcp.c

** TODO Update the libcw version number throughout unixcw package
Also come up with new version number of libcw library and update the number
in following places:
 - NEWS + README files
 - configure.ac/LIBCW_VERSION
 - contents of misc files in debian dir
 - names of misc files in debian dir
 - libcw's man page (or page's template): ./src/libcw/libcw.3.m4
 - libcw's pkg-config file (or file's template): ./src/libcw/libcw.pc.in

** TODO Build Debian packages

Use a script for building Debian packages (qa/build_debian_packages.sh) to
catch places that weren't updated correctly.

Inspect the built .deb packages, confirm that version numbers of unixcw and
of libcw are correct.

* TODO New test scenarios document

Make a properly named copy of qa/test_scenarios/template.org. The name of the
copy should reflect new version number of the package.

* TODO Synchronize with Debian
** TODO Get *debian.tar.xz archive

Go to https://packages.debian.org/sid/cw, Download *debian.tar.xz archive.

** TODO Evaluate patches from the archive

You may want to apply them to the package. Update NEWS file with information
that the patches were applied. This will let Debian team know about it
because it may affect their workflow.

** TODO Merge debian/

Merge current version of files from debian/ dir in the archive into project's
repo. Let the configuration of the package in the repo be in sync with
Debian.

** TODO Run qa/build_debian_packages.sh

Run qa/build_debian_packages.sh to confirm that Debian packages can be built
more or less correctly. Fix any issues you will find.

** TODO Fix compiler warnings

While running qa/build_debian_packages.sh, pay attention to compiler
warnings. Debian's build scripts may use different complier flags.

* TODO Remove -Werror from CFLAGS
At this stage of this list there should be no more changes in code. Remove
-Werror from CFLAGS because after this stage there should be no occasions on
which you would introduce problems in code.

You don't want to have -Werror in code that you release: computers on which
this code will be compiled by your users may have different version of
compiler, and that compiler may discover some issues. You don't want to break
compilation on users' computers due to -Werror.

* TODO Make sure that debug and optimization compiler flags are correct

Make sure that CFLAGS of code that is almost ready for release doesn't
contain "-g -O0". Do this before testing phase so that the code that you test
has been compiled with options similar to options used for release.

* TODO Do the testing per test scenarios

Test your software using test scenarios that you have created. See if you
need to repeat some tests on different software/hardware platforms. Write
down bugs that you have found and fixed, you may want to check for them when
testing next release, to see if you haven't reintroduced them.

The test scenarios describe both manual and automatic tests.

* TODO Make sure that debug and optimization compiler flags are correct (again)

Make sure that CFLAGS of code that is almost ready for release doesn't
contain "-g -O0". Do this test for a second time (after testing phase): maybe
you have added the flags during fixing of some issues found during testing
phase.

* TODO Review the opened tickets, find fixed ones

Review the list of opened tickets from README.dev.org -> "Buts, feature
requests". It may happen that some of them have been fixed during your work
in this development cycle, but you didn't notice it.

Read the list of opened tickets, find the tickets that describe already fixed
bug or already implemented feature, and close them.

* TODO Review descriptions of changes

Review information about what was changed in current releases:
 - NEWS file
 - ChangeLog file
 - README file
 - man page files (there are several man pages, check them all)

Make sure that:
 - the information is factually correct,
 - the sentences and paragraphs are logically correct.
 - the structures of documents are valid.

* TODO Run a spell check on documentation

Spell-check user-facing files:
 - NEWS
 - README
 - ChangeLog
 - man page files (there are several man pages, check them all)

* TODO Localization

If you use gettext or any other tool to facilitate localization of your
application then generate new file with strings intended for translation,
spell check it, make sure that all cryptic strings have explanatory comment,
re-generate the file again if needed.

I'm using gettext and friends in cdw, and I have prepared a small script that
invokes xgettext, the script is:

    #!/bin/bash
    xgettext src/*.c src/external_tools/*.c --no-wrap --keyword=_ --keyword=gettext_noop --add-comments=2TRANS: -o po/cdw.pot

All translatable strings are called by "gettext_noop()" or "_()" functions
("_()" is just an alias for "gettext()").

* TODO Update your website files

If your project has a homepage, update content of website files so that the
website informs visitors about new release, latest changes and new features.
Do this now, you may want to reuse some content from files updated in point
9. Test your website offline if you can. Don't put updated website files
online yet, there is still some testing to do.

Make sure that contact information available on your website is correct.

* TODO Update date in copyright notices

Update date (year) in the copyright statements like this one in all relevant
files:

    Copyright (C) 2011-2021  John Doe (email@domain.com)

* TODO Prepare release archive

Prepare tar.gz archive with source code tree that you want to release and
distribute. If you are using Autotools check "make dist" target, it is very
convenient.

* TODO Make final test using code from release archive

  1. extract the archive in some temporary directory, outside of your regular
     development directory;

  2. make a standard build using extracted source code tree, just as any
     regular user would do;

  3. if your program has any unit tests that can be run by user, run them and
     make sure that all tests are passed;

  4. run the program that you have just built, check that program starts
     correctly, that all basic functions are running as expected, that there
     is no crash or error that would discourage user who is checking your
     program;

* TODO Make final sanity check test using code from repository

  1. do an anonymous checkout of full source code tree from source code
     management (SCM) repository. This is to check if your SCM repository is
     accessible to regular users.

  2. make a standard build using checked out source code tree, just as any
     regular user would do. This is to make sure that build process will be
     successful: that there are no source code files or build system files
     missing in repository.

  You don't have to run tests or run the software and check if it works
  correctly here. You have already did this in point 12, and code in SCM
  should be the same as in your release archive.

* TODO Update statuses of issues in issue tracker

If you run any sort of bug or issue tracker, or feature request list, and
there are any issues affected or addressed by current release, update
statuses of these items: close them, comment them, update them. Don't let
fixed bugs be still open in your bug tracking system.

* TODO Publish your release archive with your program

Whether you are using sourceforge.net, tigris.org, Alioth, your own website,
or any other means of publishing archive with your program, publish an
archive file with source code of your software.

* TODO Update your website

Now that archive with program is available, you can publish your updated
website as well. Test the website to make sure that all pages are accessible.

* TODO Tag release in SCM repository

If your source code management repository supports tags, you may want to tag
this specific snapshot with name of release. If you are SCM wizard, you
should know what to do in such situations anyway :)

This is a bit of a chicken-and-egg situation: if you tag first and then mark
this item as DONE, then the tagged commit won't represent a fully closed
release. But if you change this item to DONE and only then tag a commit, you
will claim that an item is DONE before it's done :)

